# Chtd


## Preface

I've started to work for [Chtd][chtd] in October 2011 and worked till
February 2015.
It was a good time and I want to say thank you to everyone who worked with.

At the moment of writing this post the company is in a difficult sutiation
and it had to shrink (four of the six developers were forced
to leave the company).

This is going to be a long post and probably I'll keep it as is.

## Context

I'm going to sum up my experience working as a developer for [Chtd][chtd]
talking about the some interesting points.

The company has developed its own implementation of graph-oriented database
(think of [EAV][eav]) built on top of **PostgreSQL** using **Django**
called [NetDB][netdb]
(authors of the core are *Vjacheslav Fyodorov* and *Konstantin Lopuhin*).

The database provides a way of storing historical data meaning we have a full
history of changes in it (no physical delete operations). The library for this
is open sourced and is called [documents][documents].

A typical project on the basis of [NetDB][netdb] consists of several libraries
providing needed functionality.

Working with [NetDB][netdb] means we can build reports almost unlimited
in size and have automatic calculations according to calc rules
specified by analysts.

We have a specialized report builder and some other useful tools.


## Workflow

This is rather important point to begin with it. Going back to 2011
the company used
selfhosted **subversion** as a version control system and actually there was no
established workflow for development. The team was small and for some time the
situation was acceptable. But the more we wrote the code more difficult it
becomes to control the situation.

I don't remember exact dates but we changed it.

As a first step it was switch to **mercurial** repositories hosted by
[BitBucket][bitbucket]. We've splitted monolitic **svn**-repository to several
**hg** repos.

As a second step we've adopted [gitflow][gitflow] as a main workflow to work with
features, fixes and releases (it was my investigation about possible
workflows which led us to this excellent solution). Thank you, *Vincent
Driessen*, for sharing your experience!

As a third step we've started to use pull requests to review the code to be
merged to *default* branches.

From the very beginning we were using **Redmine** to track issues and manage
projects and it's just great.


## Automation

### BitBucket and Redmine

Using **svn** we had a post-commit hook configured to send email with diff to
developers mailing list.

After switching to [BitBucket][bitbucket] we wanted to keep these emails
with diff so our internal project called **bbhook** was born and released by me.

It is backed by **PostgreSQL** and **Django** and has two modes of operation -
as a service to be notified by [BitBucket][bitbucket] about push and
as a django-command configured to run by crontab every 5 minutes.

**Bbhook** project can handle multiple **hg** repositories and under the hood
it does the following:

- update repositories mirrors (repositories must be cloned on the same
  server running **bbhook**)
- process each new commit arrived from [BitBucket][bitbucket]:
    * get diff
    * prepare email text using **pygments**
    * send email
    * parse commit message to get **Redmine** issue number
    * post a message to corresponding **Redmine** issue


**Bbhook** works pretty well and we had just a few issues with it.


### Fabric

Going back to 2011 and 2012 we were using makefile to prepare configuration files
to deploy a web service (project built on [NetDB][netdb]).

It was a working solution but I wasn't satisfied with it. We still had
a lot of things to do by hand.

It should be noted that we had one development server running a lot of web
services to be tested and reviewed by our testers and analysts. The time was
critical here - we were spending too much time deploying a service.

So, I've remembered of [Fabric][fabric] and some time later we were using
our specific **fabfile**.

Its initial version had several most important commands for us:

- deploy a new service from a specified **hg** project branch
- update previously deployed service
- create **postgresql** database according to settings
- load **postgresql** dump to database or
- load database with initial data
- and some others

Later the **fabfile** was extended to build a project distribution, to attach
newly deployed service to **apache** instance, to clean up service etc.

The core command was **deploy** and combined with others we could deploy a
service by issuing just one command in **bash**.

The key win here was a way we specify service settings (server name, db
parameters etc.) - in a command line instead of manually editing configuration
file.


### Static files

*Update*. Sometimes I'm still fighting with **gulp** spending too much time
configuring it. The [article by Keith Cirkel](http://blog.keithcirkel.co.uk/how-to-use-npm-as-a-build-tool/)
helped a lot to start using `npm` as a build tool.


This is a very long story on its own that is why I'll not go into details.

We had a [Django][django]-based project with a lot of libraries.
Some of them had static files - **javascript**, **css**, **handlebars**
templates for client-side, **less** and **sass**.

We passed this way:

- **webassets** library (**python**)
- **grunt** (**nodejs**)
- **gulp** (**nodejs**)
- selfmade **bundler** (**nodejs**)

I was managing switch to **grunt** and to **gulp** and I am the only author of
**bundler**.

Reasons for this journey were speed and stability. We need speed to compile
static files and we need stability deploying new services on different servers
running different Linux flavours.

Using **grunt** we were suffering from speed and using **gulp** we were
suffering from stability (stability of **gulp plugins** to be installed on
different servers).

I am sure these are not the issues any more for **grunt** and **gulp** (and I
am successfully using **gulp** in my pet projects) but at some moment I've
decided to drop this dependency.

**Bundler** is a one **javascript** file (**nodejs** module) which is rather
complex inside but works pretty well.

There is a chance I'll write a post focusing on **bundler**.


That's all for automation section.


## Python, Javascript

This can be a huge section but I'll focus only on some examples (without any
specific order).

### Low-level NetDB administration

It was my first library written for [Chtd][chtd] and we called it
*Object editor* (*oditor*).

Due to [NetDB][netdb] specific internals there was a need for an
administration tool ([Django][django] embedded admin site didn't suit us).

I think it was great for me to create *oditor* because I had a way to better
understand [NetDB][netdb] internals.

*Oditor* had two implementations.

The first one was made using simple a-la **REST** backend and
[Dojo][dojo]-based frontend.

To tell you the truth - I don't like [Dojo][dojo].
It is great and awesome but it's not for me.
I am sure there is something with me, not with [Dojo][dojo]. I'll keep it as is.

The second implementation was made using **Backbone** and **Bootstrap**
(details on them follow) and it was a big step forward to better **python** and
**javascript** code and to usability.

### Backbone and Bootstrap

Going back to 2011/2012 my javascript code was ugly.
I was the beginner and I was trying to have code organized but I'm not sure
I've managed it.

As it usually happens there is a moment at which you understand - you have to
do something.
And by chance there was a project in which I was the only person responsible
for frontend.

I took the chance and created the basis for some of our client-side libraries.

It was based on modification of [djangbone][djangbone] for backend
(an excellent library I must say).

And it is based on [backbone][backbone], [marionette][marionette] and
[bootstrap][bootstrap] - for frontend.

I think it was one of the most important steps during the history of
[Chtd][chtd] because [QuBeQu][qubequ] ([NetDB][netdb] SaaS solution)
was built on top of this library.


### User permissions

This is a story about refactoring **python** code.

We had rather complicated permissions system developed back to 2012. Really
complicated. The author of the system has left the company a year later.

Supporting one of our projects we've got a complain from the end user about
speed. It took too much time loading one specific page from our web service
(more than a minute - awful).

Profiling showed that it's user permissions system to blame.

Quick tests showed a possible way of fixing it and at first I was thinking it
will took from seven to ten days.
Actually it took almost two months if I'm not mistaken.

I should say there was my bad refactoring tests and I lost a week or so but
still - there is a huge codebase and my estimates were naive.

Refactoring the code was a great lesson.

For the first time I've tried to use Python descriptors and I really liked it.

Python descriptors are a great way of structuring your codebase.

The result of the refactoring was awesome - page load time decreased to 1
second (from more than a minute!).


### Digital signature

We had a couple of projects with the need for digital signature support.

In general this is about integration with [CryptoPro][cryptopro] software
(Russia-only solution).

One of the tasks here was to provide full functionality for users having
certificates signed by accredited certified centers.

There is a specialized portal distributing the XML list of accredited centers
but that is not enough. We need to load CRLs too and there is no single point
to get all CRLs from.

It took some time to develop an optimal solution (this is about fetching data
from Internet).

It was one more battle for speed to load certificates and CRLs within
a reasonable time.


### OLAP

Mostly client-side library acting as an OLAP builder built on top of our
[backbone][backbone]-based library.

Most interesting part here was drag'n'drop to provide better user experience.

I've created the first version of this library and later it was handed over to
another developer.
It is one of the most valuable libraries at [QuBeQu][qubequ].


### jQuery dashboard

One more client-side library created by me.

~~I'm expecting it to be published by [Chtd][chtd] under the MIT license
(we had such an agreement)~~. It is [published][jquery.dashboard]
by [Chtd][chtd] under the MIT license.

The library is used to create custom layouts of reports and charts - for
dashboards.

Drag'n'drop here too.


There are more libraries and tasks I've done working for [Chtd][chtd], a lot more.


## Jython

This is one more subject I'd like to talk about.

We had an import/export functionality providing support for **Excel** files
(among other formats).

There were several **python**-only solutions but we were not satisfied by them.
We needed a way to work with any **xls/xlsx** file keeping its original
formatting untouched.

One day I've stumbled upon [POI][poi].

At first I was not sure we would be able to use it. I thought we need **Java**
developer.

But some time later I've remembered about the [Jython][jython] project.
It was an experiment and it was a success.

I've splitted the functionality into several parts.

The first one was [Jython][jython]-powered http service to work with **Excel**
documents.

The second one was **python** library to communicate with this service and send
and receive data.

And a bit later there was the third one - client-side import/export
configuration library providing a way to set parameters (we can read/write data
from/to different sheets and cells within **Excel** documents).

[POI][poi]-based solution worked great and we had pretty good performance for
import/export operations.


## Summary

It was a good time. There were moments I was not satisfied with myself or
someone from colleagues but we are all human beings.

We can and we must make mistakes - to be able to create something better.

I have no opportunity but would love to work using [Lean Software
Development][lean] principles.

While developing sometimes it's better to think about optimisation ahead. You
must find a balance inside your mind between the desire to experiment and the
need to provide a solution in time.

It's better to stay focused.

It's important to form the team. Very important for the project.


[chtd]: http://chtd.ru
[qubequ]: https://qubequ.com
[eav]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity–attribute–value_model
[documents]: https://bitbucket.org/chtd/documents
[netdb]: http://chtd.ru/netdb
[bitbucker]: https://bitbucket.org
[gitflow]: http://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/
[fabric]: http://www.fabfile.org/
[django]: https://djangoproject.com/
[dojo]: http://dojotoolkit.org/
[djangbone]: https://github.com/af/djangbone
[backbone]: http://backbonejs.org/
[marionette]: http://marionettejs.com/
[bootstrap]: http://getbootstrap.com/2.3.2/
[cryptopro]: http://cryptopro.ru/
[poi]: http://poi.apache.org/
[jython]: http://www.jython.org/
[lean]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lean_software_development
[jquery.dashboard]: https://github.com/chtd/jquery.dashboard
