# The finger pointing at the moon is not the moon


14 precepts by [**Thich Nhat Hanh**][1].

> Do not be idolatrous about or bound to any doctrine, theory, or ideology,
  even Buddhist ones. All systems of thought are guiding means;
  they are not absolute truth.
>
> Do not think that the knowledge you presently possess is changeless,
  absolute truth. Avoid being narrow-minded and bound to present views.
  Learn and practice non-attachment from views in order to be open to receive
  others' viewpoints. Truth is found in life and not merely in conceptual
  knowledge. Be ready to learn throughout our entire life and to observe
  reality in yourself and in the world at all times.
>
> Do not force others, including children, by any means whatsoever, to adopt
  your views, whether by authority, threat, money, propaganda, or even
  education. However, through compassionate dialogue, help others renounce
  fanaticism and narrowness.
>
> Do not avoid contact with suffering or close your eyes before suffering.
  Do not lose awareness of the existence of suffering in the life of the world.
  Find ways to be with those who are suffering by all means, including
  personal contact and visits, images, sound. By such means, awaken yourself
  and others to the reality of suffering in the world.
>
> Do not accumulate wealth while millions are hungry.
  Do not take as the aim of you life fame, profit, wealth, or sensual pleasure.
  Live simply and share time, energy, and material resources with those
  who are in need.
>
> Do not maintain anger or hatred. As soon as anger and hatred arise,
  practice the meditation on compassion in order to deeply understand
  the persons who have caused anger and hatred.
  Learn to look at other beings with the eyes of compassion.
>
> Do not lose yourself in dispersion and in your surroundings.
  Learn to practice breathing in order to regain composure of body and mind,
  to practice mindfulness, and to develop concentration and understanding.
>
> Do not utter words that can create discord and cause the community to break.
  Make every effort to reconcile and resolve all conflicts, however small.
>
> Do not say untruthful things for the sake of personal interest or
  to impress people. Do not utter words that cause diversion and hatred.
  Do not spread news that you do not know to be certain.
  Do not criticize or condemn things you are not sure of.
  Always speak truthfully and constructively.
  Have the courage to speak out about situations of injustice,
  even when doing so may threaten your own safety.
>
> Do not use the Buddhist community for personal gain or profit,
  or transform your community into a political party.
  A religious community should, however, take a clear stand
  against oppression and injustice, and should strive to change
  the situation without engaging in partisan conflicts.
>
> Do not live with a vocation that is harmful to humans and nature.
  Do not invest in companies that deprive others of their chance to life.
  Select a vocation which helps realize your ideal compassion.
>
> Do not kill. Do not let others kill.
  Find whatever means possible to protect life and to prevent war.
>
> Possess nothing that should belong to others.
  Respect the property of others but prevent others
  from enriching themselves from human suffering
  or the suffering of other beings.
>
> Do not mistreat your body.
  Learn to handle it with respect.
  Do not look on your body as only and instrument.
  Preserve vital energies (sexual, breath, spirit) for the realization
  of the Way.
  Sexual expression should not happen without love and commitment.
  In sexual relationships be aware of future suffering that may be caused.
  To preserve the happiness of others, respect the rights and commitments
  of others.
  Be fully aware of the responsibility of bringing new lives into the world.
  Meditate on the world into which you are bringing new beings.


**No words can replace practice, only practice can make the words**.


[1]: http://www.seaox.com/thich.html
